##########
Data Model
##########

*********************
Graphical Data Models
*********************

Arches Models Only

.. image:: images/arches-models-v4.2.x.png
   :target: _images/arches-models-v4.2.x.png

Full Data Model


.. image:: images/full-data-model-v4.2.x.png
   :target: _images/full-data-model-v4.2.x.png

***********************
Resource Model Overview
***********************

Resources in an Arches database are separated into distinct resource
"models", and users can create and modify resource models within the
app interface itself, using the Arches Designer. To support these
capabilities, resource models are defined with modular components that
can be re-used throughout the system.

The three basic components of a resource model are a `graph`_, a set
of data entry `forms <#form>`_, (also called menus) and a report. In
the Arches interface, each of these components comprise various
sub-components, as illustrated below.

.. image :: images/resource-model-full.png
   :target: _images/resource-model-full.png

The Arches logical model has been developed to support this modular
construction, and the relevant models are described below as they
pertain to the graph, forms (UI components), and the resource data
itself (not illustrated above).

****************
Graph Definition
****************

In the UI you will see a distinction between "resource models" and
"branches", but underneath these are both made from `GraphModel
<#graph>`_ instances. The difference is that branches utilize fewer
properties, and in a resource model `isresource = True`. In practice,
a resource model graph is created by associating branch Cards (see
below) with it. Visually, a GraphModel is a collection of `NodeGroups
<#nodegroup>`_, which are themselves collections of `Nodes
<#node>`_. All Nodes and NodeGroups are connected to each other by
`Edges <#edge>`_. Logically, when branches are added to a resource
model, the Cards for that branch are duplicated and associated with
the appropriate resource model's GraphModel. This allow for a modular
approach to creating resource graphs, as a branch can be reused in
multiple resource models.

NodeGroups can be a single Node or many Nodes. A basic example of a
NodeGroup would be ``E1_NAME`` and ``E55_NAME_TYPE``. In this case,
each ``E1_NAME`` must be paired with a ``E55_NAME_TYPE``, thereby
necessitating a group in order to support multiple name/name_type
combos associated with a given resource instance. In other words,
NodeGroup represents the logical model-level requirement that certain
sets of nodes must be grouped together to retain meaning.

NodeGroups are used to create `Cards <#cardmodel>`_, and this is done
based on the ``cardinality`` property. Therefore, not every NodeGroup
will be used to create a Card, which allows NodeGroups to exist within
other NodeGroups. The ``parentnodegroup`` property is used to record
this nesting.

Graph
=====

.. code-block:: python

    class GraphModel(models.Model):
        graphid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        deploymentfile = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        author = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        deploymentdate = models.DateTimeField(blank=True, null=True)
        version = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        isresource = models.BooleanField()
        isactive = models.BooleanField()
        iconclass = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        color = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        subtitle = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        ontology = models.ForeignKey('Ontology', db_column='ontologyid', related_name='graphs', null=True, blank=True)
        functions = models.ManyToManyField(to='Function', through='FunctionXGraph')
        jsonldcontext = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'graphs'

NodeGroup
=========

.. code-block:: python

    class NodeGroup(models.Model):
        nodegroupid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        legacygroupid = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        cardinality = models.TextField(blank=True, default='1')
        parentnodegroup = models.ForeignKey('self', db_column='parentnodegroupid', blank=True, null=True)  #Allows nodegroups within nodegroups

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'node_groups'


Node
====

.. code-block:: python

    class Node(models.Model):
        """
        Name is unique across all resources because it ties a node to values within tiles. Recommend prepending resource model to node name.

        """

        nodeid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        name = models.TextField()
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        istopnode = models.BooleanField()
        ontologyclass = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        datatype = models.TextField()
        nodegroup = models.ForeignKey(NodeGroup, db_column='nodegroupid', blank=True, null=True)
        graph = models.ForeignKey(GraphModel, db_column='graphid', blank=True, null=True)
        config = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='config')
        issearchable = models.BooleanField(default=True)
        isrequired = models.BooleanField(default=False)

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'nodes'


Edge
====

.. code-block:: python

    class Edge(models.Model):
        edgeid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)  # This field type is a guess.
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        ontologyproperty = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        domainnode = models.ForeignKey('Node', db_column='domainnodeid', related_name='edge_domains')
        rangenode = models.ForeignKey('Node', db_column='rangenodeid', related_name='edge_ranges')
        graph = models.ForeignKey('GraphModel', db_column='graphid', blank=True, null=True)

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'edges'
            unique_together = (('rangenode', 'domainnode'),)


Function
========

.. code-block:: python

    class Function(models.Model):
        functionid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)  # This field type is a guess.
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        functiontype = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        defaultconfig = JSONField(blank=True, null=True)
        modulename = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        classname = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        component = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True, unique=True)

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'functions'



*******************
UI Component Models
*******************

.. important::
   In the Arches 4.2 UI, **Forms** are called **Menus**. The terms are
   used interchangeably in this documentation.


A number of models exist specifically to support the resource model
UI. The purpose of this is to create direct relationships between the
resource graph and the data entry menus that are used to create
resource instances. Generally, the process works like this:

#. A resource graph is an organized collection NodeGroups which define
   what information will be gathered for a given resource model.

#. A resource's data entry menus are made of `Cards <#cardmodel>`_ and
   `CardComponents <#cardcomponent>`_ that are tied to specific
   NodeGroups and define which input `Widgets <#widget>`_ will be used
   to gather values for each Node in that NodeGroup.

.. image:: images/graph-forms.png
   :target: _images/graph-forms.png

Each graph model instance that represents a resource model has any
number of Form instances attached to it, which are meant to
thematically categorize sets of data entry. Forms are made up of one
or more Cards. Cards are UI representations of a NodeGroup, and they
encapsulate the Widgets that facilitate data entry for each Node in a
given NodeGroup instance.

While a Card will only handle data entry for a single NodeGroup (which
may have many Nodes or children NodeGroups), a single NodeGroup can be
handled by more than one Card. This allows a NodeGroup to be
represented on one Card in the web app, and in a different Card in the
mobile app. Like a NodeGroup, a Card may be nested within a parent
Card, which is necessary in the case of wizards/card groups. These
nested cards are called "sub-cards" in the Resource Manager interface.


Form
====

.. code-block:: python

    class Form(models.Model):
        formid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)  # This field type is a guess.
        title = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        subtitle = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        iconclass = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        visible = models.BooleanField(default=True)
        sortorder = models.IntegerField(blank=True, null=True, default=None)
        graph = models.ForeignKey('GraphModel', db_column='graphid', blank=False, null=False)

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'forms'

CardModel
=========
A ``card`` is the UI container for ``tiles`` (see `tile`_) in menus, reports, etc

.. code-block:: python

    class CardModel(models.Model):
        cardid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)  # This field type is a guess.
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        instructions = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        helpenabled = models.BooleanField(default=False)
        helptitle = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        helptext = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        nodegroup = models.ForeignKey('NodeGroup', db_column='nodegroupid')
        graph = models.ForeignKey('GraphModel', db_column='graphid')
        active = models.BooleanField(default=True)
        visible = models.BooleanField(default=True)
        sortorder = models.IntegerField(blank=True, null=True, default=None)
        component = models.ForeignKey('CardComponent', db_column='componentid', default=uuid.UUID('f05e4d3a-53c1-11e8-b0ea-784f435179ea'))
        config = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='config')

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'cards'

CardComponent
=============
Used to extend or overwrite the default behavior of a ``card``

.. code-block:: python

    class CardComponent(models.Model):
        componentid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        component = models.TextField()
        componentname = models.TextField()
        defaultconfig = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='defaultconfig')

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'card_components'


Field description:

:name: a name to be displayed in the UI for this component
:description: a description to be displayed in the UI for this component
:component: a require path for the JS module representing this component
:componentname: a Knockout.js component name used by this component (for rendering via knockout's component binding handler)
:defaultconfig: a default JSON configuration object to be used by cards that implement this component

Widget
======

.. code-block:: python

    class Widget(models.Model):
        widgetid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)  # This field type is a guess.
        name = models.TextField(unique=True)
        component = models.TextField(unique=True)
        defaultconfig = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='defaultconfig')
        helptext = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        datatype = models.TextField()

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'widgets'

DDataType
=========
Used to validate data entered into ``widgets``

.. code-block:: python

    class DDataType(models.Model):
        datatype = models.TextField(primary_key=True)
        iconclass = models.TextField()
        modulename = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        classname = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        defaultwidget = models.ForeignKey(db_column='defaultwidget', to='models.Widget', null=True)
        defaultconfig = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='defaultconfig')
        configcomponent = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        configname = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        issearchable = models.NullBooleanField(default=False)
        isgeometric = models.BooleanField()

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'd_data_types'

Report
======

Reports aggregate and display information that has been entered for a
resource, and also allow you to keep certain information hidden from
the public. You can also define multiple reports for a given Resource
Model, which allow for even more flexibility in how you publish your
data.


.. code-block:: python

    class Report(models.Model):
        reportid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        template = models.ForeignKey(ReportTemplate, db_column='templateid')
        graph = models.ForeignKey(GraphModel, db_column='graphid')
        config =o JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='config')
        formsconfig = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='formsconfig')
        active = models.BooleanField(default=False)

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'reports'


ReportTemplate
==============

Functionally similar to ``CardComponents``, a ReportTemplate allows
for customization of the behavior of a ``Report``.

.. code-block:: python

    class ReportTemplate(models.Model):
        templateid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        name = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        description = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        component = models.TextField()
        componentname = models.TextField()
        defaultconfig = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='defaultconfig')

        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'report_templates'


*************
Resource Data
*************

Three models are used to store Arches business data:

+ ``ResourceInstance`` - one per resource in the database

+ ``Tile`` - stores all business data

+ ``ResourceXResource`` - records relationships between resource instances


Creating a new resource in the database instantiates a new
`ResourceInstance`_, which belongs to one resource model and has a
unique ``resourceinstanceid``. A resource instance may also have its
own security/permissions properties in order to allow a fine-grained
level of user-based permissions.

Once data have been captured, they are stored as Tiles in the
database. Each Tile stores one instance of all of the attributes of a
given NodeGroup for a resource instance, as referenced by the
``resourceinstanceid``. This business data is stored as a JSON object,
which is a dictionary with n number of keys/value pairs that represent
a Node's id ``nodeid`` and that Node's value.

in theory:

.. code-block:: json

   {
        "nodeid": "node value",
        "nodeid": "node value"
   }



in practice:

.. code-block:: json

   {
        "20000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000002": "John",
        "20000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000004": "Primary"
   }

(The keys in the second example refer to an ``E1_NAME`` node and an
``E55_NAME_TYPE`` node, respectively.)


Arches also allows for the creation of relationships between resource
instances, and these are stored as instances of the
`ResourceXResource`_ model. The ``resourceinstanceidfrom`` and
``resourceinstanceidto`` fields create the relationship, and
``relationshiptype`` qualifies the relationship. The latter must
correspond to the appropriate top node in the RDM. This constrains the
list of available types of relationships available between resource
instances.

ResourceInstance
================

.. code-block:: python

   class ResourceInstance(models.Model):
    resourceinstanceid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
    resourceclass = models.ForeignKey(Node, db_column='resourceclassid')
    resourceinstancesecurity = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True) #Intended to support flagging individual resources as unavailable to given user roles.
    "At present, this field is not fully baked.  Idea here is to acknowldge that we need to be able to apply role-based security at a resourceinstance by resourceinstance level."
    class Meta:
        managed = True
        db_table = 'resource_instances'

Tile
====

.. code-block:: python

    class Tile(models.Model):
        tileid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        data = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='tiledata')
        resourceinstance = models.ForeignKey(ResourceInstance, db_column='resourceinstanceid')
        parenttile = models.ForeignKey('self', db_column='parenttileid', blank=True, null=True)
        nodegroup = models.ForeignKey(NodeGroup, db_column='nodegroupid')
        sortorder = models.IntegerField(blank=True, null=True, default=0)
        provisionaledits = JSONField(blank=True, null=True, db_column='provisionaledits')
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'tiles'

ResourceXResource
=================

.. code-block:: python

    class ResourceXResource(models.Model):
        resourcexid = models.AutoField(primary_key=True)
        relationshiptype = models.ForeignKey('Value', db_column='relationshiptype')
        resourceinstanceidfrom = models.ForeignKey('ResourceInstance', db_column='resourceinstanceidfrom', blank=True, null=True, related_name='resxres_resource_instance_ids_from')
        resourceinstanceidto = models.ForeignKey('ResourceInstance', db_column='resourceinstanceidto', blank=True, null=True, related_name='resxres_resource_instance_ids_to')
        notes = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        datestarted = models.DateField(blank=True, null=True)
        dateended = models.DateField(blank=True, null=True)
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'resource_x_resource'

Edit Log
==========

A change in a Tile's contents, which is the result of any resource
edits, is recorded as an instance of the EditLog model.

.. code-block:: python

    class EditLog(models.Model):
        editlogid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        resourceclassid = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        resourceinstanceid = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        attributenodeid = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        tileinstanceid = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        edittype = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        newvalue = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        oldvalue = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        timestamp = models.DateTimeField(blank=True, null=True)
        userid = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        user_firstname = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        user_lastname = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        user_email = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        note = models.TextField(blank=True, null=True)
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'edit_log'


**********
RDM Models
**********

The RDM (Reference Data Manager) stores all of the vocabularies used
in your Arches installation. Whether they are simple wordlists or a
polyhierarchical thesauri, these vocabularies are stored as "concept
schemes" and can be viewed as an aggregation of one or more `concepts
<#concept>`_ and the semantic relationships (links) between those
concepts.

In the data model, a concept scheme consists of a set of Concept
instances, each paired with a `Value`_. In our running name/name_type
example, the ``E55_NAME_TYPE`` Node would be linked to a Concept
(``E55_NAME_TYPE``) which would have two child Concepts. Thus, where
the user sees a dropdown containing "Primary" and "Alternate", these
are actually the Values of ``E55_NAME_TYPE``'s two descendent
Concepts. The parent/child relationships between Concepts are stored
as `Relation`_ instances.

Concept
=======

.. code-block:: python

    class Concept(models.Model):
        conceptid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)  //This field type is a guess.
        nodetype = models.ForeignKey('DNodeType', db_column='nodetype')
        legacyoid = models.TextField(unique=True)
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'concepts'

Relation
========

.. code-block:: python

    class Relation(models.Model):
        relationid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        conceptfrom = models.ForeignKey(Concept, db_column='conceptidfrom', related_name='relation_concepts_from')
        conceptto = models.ForeignKey(Concept, db_column='conceptidto', related_name='relation_concepts_to')
        relationtype = models.ForeignKey(DRelationType, db_column='relationtype')
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'relations'

Value
=====

.. code-block:: python

    class Value(models.Model):
        valueid = models.UUIDField(primary_key=True, default=uuid.uuid1)
        concept = models.ForeignKey('Concept', db_column='conceptid')
        valuetype = models.ForeignKey(DValueType, db_column='valuetype')
        value = models.TextField()
        language = models.ForeignKey(DLanguage, db_column='languageid', blank=True, null=True)
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'values'


**********
Ontologies
**********

An ontology standardizes a set of valid CRM (Conceptual Reference
Model) classes for Node instances, as well as a set of relationships
that will define Edge instances. Most importantly, an ontology
enforces which Edges can be used to connect which Nodes. If a
pre-loaded ontology is designated for a GraphModel instance, every
NodeGroup within that GraphModel must conform to that ontology. You
may also create an "ontology-less" graph, which will not define
specific CRM classes for the Nodes and Edges.

These rules are stored as `OntologyClass`_ instances, which are stored
as JSON. These JSON objects consist of dictionaries with two
properties, `down` and `up`, each of which contains another two
properties `ontology_property` and `ontology_classes` (`down` assumes
a known domain class, while `up` assumes a known range class).

.. code-block:: json

  {
    "down":[
      {
        "ontology_property":"P1_is_identified_by",
        "ontology_classes": [
          "E51_Contact_Point",
          "E75_Conceptual_Object_Appellation",
          "E42_Identifier",
          "E45_Address",
          "E41_Appellation"
        ]
      }
    ],
  "up":[
    {
      "ontology_property":"P1_identifies",
      "ontology_classes":[
        "E51_Contact_Point",
        "E75_Conceptual_Object_Appellation",
        "E42_Identifier"
        ]
      }
    ]
  }



Aches comes preloaded with the `CIDOC CRM
<http://www.cidoc-crm.org/>`_, an ontology created by ICOM
(International Council of Museums) to model cultural heritage
documentation. However, a developer may create and load an entirely
new ontology.


Ontology
========

.. code-block:: python

    class Ontology(models.Model):
        ontologyid = models.UUIDField(default=uuid.uuid1, primary_key=True)
        name = models.TextField()
        version = models.TextField()
        path = models.FileField(storage=get_ontology_storage_system())
        parentontology = models.ForeignKey('Ontology', db_column='parentontologyid', related_name='extensions', null=True, blank=True)
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'ontologies'

OntologyClass
=============

.. code-block:: python

    class OntologyClass(models.Model):
        ontologyclassid = models.UUIDField(default=uuid.uuid1, primary_key=True)
        source = models.TextField()
        target = JSONField(null=True)
        ontology = models.ForeignKey('Ontology', db_column='ontologyid', related_name='ontologyclasses')
        class Meta:
            managed = True
            db_table = 'ontologyclasses'
            unique_together=(('source', 'ontology'),)
